---
layout: post
title: 5 ways to get yourself hurt in the new H1b race
date: 2015-10-10
tags: I140 FOIA g-639 I130
comments: true
description: Instruction to fill form g-639 to request approved I140
---

5 Easy ways to get yourself hurt in the H1b 2018 race

1) Missing the deadline for the lottery
Usually, USCIS starts accepting the new h1b visa petitions starting April 1st. But in earlier times, when the H1b visa demand used to be less, one can apply for the Visa through rest of the year.
However, in the last few years the demand is sky rocketing that the computer generated lottery has become the norm. Petitions exceed the H1b cap typically within the first week.
This year is not going to be different. So, if your employers petition doesn't reach USCIS by appropriate time you will be left out of the lottery. 
And applying for a new petition needs a few weeks of lead time to prepare the case and file LCA etc. Few years ago I accepted a position with an mid-size employer who had never sponsored a H1b visa.
At the time of offering the job they confirmed they would apply for my h1b in the upcoming H1b season. So, I assumed the HR would be preparing for my application. When I casually enquired about it in March, to my horror my H1b sponsorship plan quietly slipped in the corporate cracks. Then there was this scramble to get necessary approvals from my managers to even get the ball rolling. They had to find a good layer, become familiar with the process etc. All in all when they applied for my H1b it was June. Luckily, that year the demand was too low and I survived. 
So, either it's a small company or a bigger one which sponsors lot's of visas make sure you are in the year's h1b roster. 

2) Applying multiple petitions through the Employer and it's affiliated companies
As stated above with lottery becoming the norm, some people try to increase their chances by applying more than once. USCIS in general doesn't prevent multiple petitions.
However, there are caveats. If the same employer applies multiple petitions for you, both will be rejected. And USCIS also doesn't like if an Employer and it's affiliates file 
for the same candidate. So, if you are thinking of increasing your chances by getting mltiple employers file for you be careful to get into this sticky situation. 

3) Apply multiple petitions for the same end client project through different employer
This is another special case of multiple petitions specially with the so called "EVC" model. If totally different employers file the petition for the same employee and for the same end client role
then expect more scrutiny and rejecttion from USCIS

4) Paying the H1b fees yourself
Legally, you are not supposed to pay your H1b filing fee. That has to be borne by your employer. However, if you want to upgrade your petition to premium processing, it's ok for the employee to pay the upgrade fee. If your sponsoring employer insists that you do, you may want to stay away from such employers. 
If USCIS finds out that the fee came from your pocket then you will be in trouble. And even otherwise we see lots of online reports of the employer not returning the money when the petition was not selected in the lottery. Either ways you may get hurt. 

5) Employer’s Failure to Meet Requirements
This is one of the common reasons for H1b rejection. Your employer should have legitimate business, tax filings and the ability to pay you etc. And they should be able to prove it fair and square to USCIS when asked. Do a thorough analysis of your employer's past H1b success rate, failure rate etc. It goes without saying that your case is likely to be smooth if your employer applies for H1b visas 
regularly and has good success rate. But remember not all employers who have never applied for H1b in the past are bad. There are many good small and medium companies and startups that never had to apply in the past. You may have to be more actively involved with them throughout the process
